    Unjust laws exist; shall we be content to obey
them, or shall we endeavor to amend them, and obey
them until we have succeeded, or shall we transgress
them at once? Men generally, under such a
government as this, think that they ought to wait
until they have persuaded the majority to alter them.
They think that, if they should resist, the remedy
would be worse than the evil. But it is the fault of the
government itself that the remedy is worse than the
evil. It makes it worse. Why is it not more apt to
anticipate and provide for reform? Why does it not
cherish its wise minority? Why does it cry and resist
before it is hurt?...
    If the injustice is part of the necessary friction of
the machine of government, let it go, let it go;
perchance it will wear smooth—certainly the
machine will wear out. If the injustice has a spring, or
a pulley, or a rope, or a crank, exclusively for itself,
then perhaps you may consider whether the remedy
will not be worse than the evil; but if it is of such a
nature that it requires you to be the agent of injustice
to another, then, I say, break the law. Let your life be
a counter friction to stop the machine. What I have
to do is to see, at any rate, that I do not lend myself to
the wrong which I condemn.
    As for adopting the ways which the State has
provided for remedying the evil, I know not of such
ways. They take too much time, and a man’s life will
be gone. I have other affairs to attend to. I came into
this world, not chiefly to make this a good place to
live in, but to live in it, be it good or bad. A man has
not everything to do, but something; and because he
cannot do everything, it is not necessary that he
should do something wrong....
    I do not hesitate to say, that those who call
themselves Abolitionists should at once effectually
withdraw their support, both in person and property,
from the government . . . and not wait till they
constitute a majority of one, before they suffer the
right to prevail through them. I think that it is
enough if they have God on their side, without
waiting for that other one. Moreover, any man more
right than his neighbors constitutes a majority of one
already.