    Let every American, every lover of liberty, every
well wisher to his posterity, swear by the blood of the
Revolution, never to violate in the least particular,
the laws of the country; and never to tolerate their
violation by others. As the patriots of seventy-six did
to the support of the Declaration of Independence, so
to the support of the Constitution and Laws, let every
American pledge his life, his property, and his sacred
honor;—let every man remember that to violate the
law, is to trample on the blood of his father, and to
tear the character of his own, and his children’s
liberty. Let reverence for the laws, be breathed by
every American mother, to the lisping babe, that
prattles on her lap—let it be taught in schools, in
seminaries, and in colleges;—let it be written in
Primers, spelling books, and in Almanacs;—let it be
preached from the pulpit, proclaimed in legislative
halls, and enforced in courts of justice. And, in short,
let it become the political religion of the nation;
and let the old and the young, the rich and the poor,
the grave and the gay, of all sexes and tongues, and
colors and conditions, sacrifice unceasingly upon its
altars....
    When I so pressingly urge a strict observance of
all the laws, let me not be understood as saying there
are no bad laws, nor that grievances may not arise,
for the redress of which, no legal provisions have
been made. I mean to say no such thing. But I do
mean to say, that, although bad laws, if they exist,
should be repealed as soon as possible, still while they
continue in force, for the sake of example, they
should be religiously observed. So also in unprovided
cases. If such arise, let proper legal provisions be
made for them with the least possible delay; but, till
then, let them if not too intolerable, be borne with.
    There is no grievance that is a fit object of redress
by mob law. In any case that arises, as for instance,
the promulgation of abolitionism, one of two
positions is necessarily true; that is, the thing is right
within itself, and therefore deserves the protection of
all law and all good citizens; or, it is wrong, and
therefore proper to be prohibited by legal
enactments; and in neither case, is the interposition
of mob law, either necessary, justifiable, or excusable.