    Miss Grace Spivey arrived in Threestep, Georgia,
in August 1938. She stepped off the train wearing a
pair of thick-soled boots suitable for hiking, a navy
Line blue dress, and a little white tam that rode the waves
of her red hair at a gravity-defying angle. August was
a hellish month to step off the train in Georgia,
although it was nothing, she said, compared to the
119 degrees that greeted her when she arrived one
time in Timbuktu, which, she assured us, was a real
place in Africa. I believe her remark irritated some of
the people gathered to welcome her on the burned
grass alongside the tracks. When folks are sweating
through their shorts, they don’t like to hear that this
is nothing compared to someplace else. Irritated or
not, the majority of those present were inclined to see
the arrival of the new schoolteacher in a positive
light. Hard times were still upon us in 1938, but, like
my momma said, “We weren’t no poorer than we’d
ever been,” and the citizens of Threestep were in the
mood for a little excitement.
   Miss Spivey looked like just the right person to
give it to them. She was, by almost anyone’s
standards, a woman of the world. She’d gone to
boarding schools since she was six years old; she’d
studied French in Paris and drama in London; and
during what she called a “fruitful intermission” in her
formal education, she had traveled extensively in the
Near East and Africa with a friend of her
grandmother’s, one Janet Miller, who was a medical
doctor from Nashville, Tennessee. After her travels
with Dr. Miller, Miss Spivey continued her education
by attending Barnard College in New York City. She
told us all that at school the first day. When my little
brother Ralphord asked what did she study at
Barnyard College, Miss Spivey explained that
Barnard, which she wrote on the blackboard, was the
sister school of Columbia University, of which, she
expected, we all had heard.
    It was there, she told us, in the midst of trying to
find her true mission in life, that she wandered one
afternoon into a lecture by the famous John Dewey,
who was talking about his famous book, Democracy
and Education. Professor Dewey was in his seventies
by then, Miss Spivey said, but he still liked to chat
with students after a lecture—especially female
students, she added—sometimes over coffee, and see
in their eyes the fire his words could kindle. It was
after this lecture and subsequent coffee that Miss
Spivey had marched to the Teacher’s College and
signed up, all aflame. Two years later, she told a
cheery blue-suited woman from the WPA1 that she
wanted to bring democracy and education to the
poorest, darkest, most remote and forgotten corner
of America.
    They sent her to Threestep, Georgia.
    Miss Spivey paused there for questions, avoiding
my brother Ralphord’s eye.
    What we really wanted to know about—all
twenty-six of us across seven grade levels in the one
room—was the pearly white button hanging on a
string in front of the blackboard behind the teacher’s
desk up front. That button on a string was something
new. When Mavis Davis (the only bona fide seventh
grader, at age thirteen) asked what it was for, Miss
Spivey gave the string a tug, and to our astonishment,
the whole world—or at least a wrinkled map of
it—unfolded before our eyes. Her predecessor, Miss
Chandler, had never once made use of that map,
which was older than our fathers, and until that
moment, not a one of us knew it was there.
    Miss Spivey showed us on the map how she and
Dr. Janet Miller had sailed across the Atlantic Ocean
and past the Rock of Gibraltar into the
Mediterranean Sea. Using the end of a ruler, she
gently tapped such places as Morocco and Tunis and
Algiers to mark their route along the top of Africa.
They spent twenty hours on the train to Baghdad, she
said, swathed in veils against the sand that crept in
every crack and crevice.
    “And can you guess what we saw from the train?”
Miss Spivey asked. We could not. “Camels!” she said.
“We saw a whole caravan of camels.” She looked
around the room, waiting for us to be amazed and
delighted at the thought.
    We all hung there for a minute, thinking hard,
until Mavis Davis spoke up.
    “She means like the three kings rode to
Bethlehem,” Mavis said, and she folded her hands
smugly on her seventh-grade desk in the back of the
room.
    Miss Spivey made a mistake right then. Instead of
beaming upon Mavis the kind of congratulatory
smile that old Miss Chandler would have bestowed
on her for having enlightened the rest of us, Miss
Spivey simply said, “That’s right.”