    Building good transit isn’t a bad idea, but it can
actually backfire if the new trains and buses merely
clear space on highway lanes for those who would
Line prefer to drive—a group that, historically, has
included almost everyone with access to a car. To
have environmental value, new transit has to replace
and eliminate driving on a scale sufficient to cut
energy consumption overall. That means that a new
transit system has to be backed up by something that
impels complementary reductions in car use—say,
the physical elimination of traffic lanes or the
conversion of existing roadways into bike or bus
lanes, ideally in combination with higher fuel taxes,
parking fees, and tolls. Needless to say, those ideas
are not popular. But they’re necessary, because you
can’t make people drive less, in the long run, by
taking steps that make driving more pleasant,
economical, and productive.
    One of the few forces with a proven ability to slow
the growth of suburban sprawl has been the
ultimately finite tolerance of commuters for long,
annoying commutes. That tolerance has grown in
recent decades, and not just in the United States, but
it isn’t unlimited, and even people who don’t seem to
mind spending half their day in a car eventually
reach a point where, finally, enough is enough. That
means that traffic congestion can have
environmental value, since it lengthens commuting
times and, by doing so, discourages the proliferation
of still more energy-hungry subdivisions—unless we
made the congestion go away. If, in a misguided
effort to do something of environmental value,
municipalities take steps that make long-distance car
commuting faster or more convenient—by adding
lanes, building bypasses, employing traffic-control
measures that make it possible for existing roads to
accommodate more cars with fewer delays, replacing
tollbooths with radio-based systems that don’t
require drivers even to slow down—we actually make
the sprawl problem worse, by indirectly encouraging
people to live still farther from their jobs, stores,
schools, and doctors’ offices, and by forcing
municipalities to further extend road networks,
power grids, water lines, and other civic
infrastructure. If you cut commuting time by
10 percent, people who now drive fifty miles each
way to work can justify moving five miles farther out,
because their travel time won’t change. This is how
metropolitan areas metastasize. It’s the history of
suburban expansion.
    Traffic congestion isn’t an environmental
problem; traffic is. Relieving congestion without
doing anything to reduce the total volume of cars can
only make the real problem worse. Highway
engineers have known for a long time that building
new car lanes reduces congestion only temporarily,
because the new lanes foster additional driving—a
phenomenon called induced traffic. Widening roads
makes traffic move faster in the short term, but the
improved conditions eventually attract additional
drivers and entice current drivers to drive more, and
congestion reappears, but with more cars—and that
gets people thinking about widening roads again.
Moving drivers out of cars and into other forms of
transportation can have the same effect, if existing
traffic lanes are kept in service: road space begets
road use.
    One of the arguments that cities inevitably make
in promoting transit plans is that the new system, by
relieving automobile congestion, will improve the
lives of those who continue to drive. No one ever
promotes a transit scheme by arguing that it would
make traveling less convenient—even though, from
an environmental perspective, inconvenient travel is
a worthy goal.