    If it is right for the United States to hold the
Philippine Islands permanently and imitate
European empires in the government of colonies, the
Republican party ought to state its position and
defend it, but it must expect the subject races to
protest against such a policy and to resist to the
extent of their ability.
    The Filipinos do not need any encouragement
from Americans now living. Our whole history has
been an encouragement not only to the Filipinos, but
to all who are denied a voice in their own
government. If the Republicans are prepared to
censure all who have used language calculated to
make the Filipinos hate foreign domination, let them
condemn the speech of Patrick Henry. When he
uttered that passionate appeal, “Give me liberty or
give me death,” he exprest a sentiment which still
echoes in the hearts of men.
    Let them censure Jefferson; of all the statesmen of
history none have used words so offensive to those
who would hold their fellows in political bondage.
Let them censure Washington, who declared that the
colonists must choose between liberty and slavery.
Or, if the statute of limitations has run against
the sins of Henry and Jefferson and Washington, let
them censure Lincoln, whose Gettysburg speech will
be quoted in defense of popular government when
the present advocates of force and conquest are
forgotten.
    Some one has said that a truth once spoken can
never be recalled. It goes on and on, and no one can
set a limit to its ever-widening influence. But if it
were possible to obliterate every word written or
spoken in defense of the principles set forth in the
Declaration of Independence, a war of conquest
would still leave its legacy of perpetual hatred, for it
was God himself who placed in every human heart
the love of liberty. He never made a race of people so
low in the scale of civilization or intelligence that it
would welcome a foreign master.
    Those who would have this Nation enter upon a
career of empire must consider, not only the effect of
imperialism on the Filipinos, but they must also
calculate its effects upon our own nation. We cannot
repudiate the principle of self-government in the
Philippines without weakening that principle here.