    Fellow-Citizens: It is a noble land that God has
given us; a land that can feed and clothe the world; a
land whose coast lines would enclose half the
Line countries of Europe; a land set like a sentinel between
the two imperial oceans of the globe; a greater
England with a nobler destiny. It is a mighty people
that He has planted on this soil; a people sprung
from the most masterful blood of history; a people
perpetually revitalized by the virile... working-folk
of all the earth; a people imperial by virtue of their
power, by right of their institutions, by authority of
their heaven-directed purposes—the propagandists
and not the misers of liberty. It is a glorious history
our God has bestowed upon His chosen people; a
history whose keynote was struck by Liberty Bell; a
history heroic with faith in our mission and our
future; a history of statesmen, who flung the
boundaries of the Republic out into unexplored
lands...a history of soldiers, who carried the flag
across blazing deserts and through the ranks of
hostile mountains, even to the gates of sunset; a
history of a multiplying people, who overran a
continent in half a century...a history divinely
logical, in the process of whose tremendous
reasoning we find ourselves to-day....
    Think of the thousands of Americans who will
pour into Hawaii and Porto Rico when the
Republic’s laws cover those islands with justice and
safety! Think of the tens of thousands of Americans
who will invade . . . the Philippines when a liberal
government... shall establish order and equity
there! Think of the hundreds of thousands of
Americans who will builda... civilization of energy
and industry in Cuba, when a government of law
replaces the double reign of anarchy and tyranny!—
think of the prosperous millions that Empress of
Islands will support when, obedient to the law of
political gravitation, her people ask for the highest
honor liberty can bestow, the sacred Order of the
Stars and Stripes, the citizenship of the Great
Republic!