    That half the human race is excluded by the other
half from any participation in government; that they
are native by birth but foreign by law in the very land
where they were born; and that they are
property-owners yet have no direct influence or
representation: are all political phenomena
apparently impossible to explain on abstract
principle. But on another level of ideas, the question
changes and may be easily resolved. The purpose of
all these institutions must be the happiness of the
greatest number. Everything that leads us farther
from this purpose is in error; everything that brings
us closer is truth. If the exclusion from public
employments decreed against women leads to a
greater sum of mutual happiness for the two sexes,
then this becomes a law that all Societies have been
compelled to acknowledge and sanction.
    Any other ambition would be a reversal of our
primary destinies; and it will never be in women’s
interest to change the assignment they have received.
    It seems to us incontestable that our common
happiness, above all that of women, requires that
they never aspire to the exercise of political rights
and functions. Here we must seek their interests in
the wishes of nature. Is it not apparent, that their
delicate constitutions, their peaceful inclinations, and
the many duties of motherhood, set them apart from
strenuous habits and onerous duties, and summon
them to gentle occupations and the cares of the
home? And is it not evident that the great conserving
principle of Societies, which makes the division of
powers a source of harmony, has been expressed and
revealed by nature itself, when it divided the
functions of the two sexes in so obviously distinct a
manner? This is sufficient; we need not invoke
principles that are inapplicable to the question. Let us
not make rivals of life’s companions. You must, you
truly must allow the persistence of a union that no
interest, no rivalry, can possibly undo. Understand
that the good of all demands this of you.