    To avoid . . . the evils of inconstancy and
versatility, ten thousand times worse than those of
obstinacy and the blindest prejudice, we have
consecrated the state, that no man should approach
to look into its defects or corruptions but with due
caution; that he should never dream of beginning its
reformation by its subversion; that he should
approach to the faults of the state as to the wounds of
a father, with pious awe and trembling solicitude. By
this wise prejudice we are taught to look with horror
on those children of their country who are prompt
rashly to hack that aged parent in pieces, and put him
into the kettle of magicians, in hopes that by their
poisonous weeds, and wild incantations, they may
regenerate the paternal constitution, and renovate
their father’s life.
    Society is indeed a contract. Subordinate contracts
for objects of mere occasional interest may be
dissolved at pleasure—but the state ought not to be
considered as nothing better than a partnership
agreement in a trade of pepper and coffee, calico or
tobacco, or some other such low concern, to be taken
up for a little temporary interest, and to be dissolved
by the fancy of the parties. It is to be looked on with
other reverence; because it is not a partnership in
things subservient only to the gross animal existence
of a temporary and perishable nature. It is a
partnership in all science; a partnership in all art; a
partnership in every virtue, and in all perfection.
As the ends of such a partnership cannot be obtained
in many generations, it becomes a partnership not
only between those who are living, but between those
who are living, those who are dead, and those who
are to be born. . . . The municipal corporations of
that universal kingdom are not morally at liberty at
their pleasure, and on their speculations of a
contingent improvement, wholly to separate and tear
asunder the bands of their subordinate community,
and to dissolve it into an unsocial, uncivil,
unconnected chaos of elementary principles.