    “Pathogens are acquiring resistance faster than we
can introduce new antibiotics, and this is causing a
human health crisis,” says biochemist Kim Lewis of
Line Northeastern University.
    Lewis is part of a team that recently unveiled a
promising antibiotic, born from a new way to tap the
powers of soil microorganisms. In animal tests,
teixobactin proved effective at killing off a wide
variety of disease-causing bacteria—even those that
have developed immunity to other drugs. The
scientists’ best efforts to create mutant bacteria with
resistance to the drug failed, meaning teixobactin
could function effectively for decades before
pathogens naturally evolve resistance to it.
    Natural microbial substances from soil bacteria
and fungi have been at the root of most antibiotic
drug development during the past century. But only
about one percent of these organisms can be grown
in a lab. The rest, in staggering numbers, have
remained uncultured and of limited use to medical
science, until now. “Instead of trying to figure out the
ideal conditions for each and every one of the
millions of organisms out there in the environment,
to allow them to grow in the lab, we simply grow
them in their natural environment where they
already have the conditions they need for growth,”
Lewis says.
    To do this, the team designed a gadget that
sandwiches a soil sample between two membranes,
each perforated with pores that allow molecules like
nutrients to diffuse through but don’t allow the
passage of cells. “We just use it to trick the bacteria
into thinking that they are in their natural
environment,” Lewis says.
    The team isolated 10,000 strains of uncultured soil
bacteria and prepared extracts from them that could
be tested against nasty pathogenic bacteria.
Teixobactin emerged as the most promising drug.
Mice infected with bacteria that cause upper
respiratory tract infections (including Staphylococcus
aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae) were treated
with teixobactin, and the drug knocked out the
infections with no noticeable toxic effects.
    It’s likely that teixobactin is effective because of
the way it targets disease: The drug breaks down
bacterial cell walls by attacking the lipid molecules
that the cell creates organically. Many other
antibiotics target the bacteria’s proteins, and the
genes that encode those proteins can mutate to
produce different structures.