    Many good antibiotic families—penicillin,
streptomycin, tetracycline—come from soil fungi
and bacteria and it has long been suspected that, if
we could grow more types of bacteria from soil—or
from exotic environments, such as deep
oceans—then we might find new natural antibiotics.
In a recent study, researchers [Kim Lewis and others]
found that they could isolate and grow individual soil
bacteria—including types that can’t normally be
grown in the laboratory—in soil itself, which
supplied critical nutrients and minerals. Once the
bacteria reached a critical mass they could be
transferred to the lab and their cultivation continued.
This simple and elegant methodology is their most
important finding to my mind, for it opens a gateway
to cultivating a wealth of potentially antibiotic-
producing bacteria that have never been grown
before.
    The first new antibiotic that they’ve found by this
approach, teixobactin, from a bacterium called
Eleftheria terrae, is less exciting to my mind, though
it doesn’t look bad. Teixobactin killed Gram-positive
bacteria, such as S. aureus, in the laboratory, and
cured experimental infection in mice. It also killed
the tuberculosis bacterium, which is important
because there is a real problem with resistant
tuberculosis in the developing world. It was also
difficult to select teixobactin resistance.
    So, what are my caveats? Well, I see three. First,
teixobactin isn’t a potential panacea. It doesn’t kill
the Gram-negative opportunists as it is too big to
cross their complex cell wall. Secondly, scaling to
commercial manufacture will be challenging, since
the bacteria making the antibiotic are so difficult to
grow. And, thirdly, it’s early days yet. As with any
antibiotic, teixobactin now faces the long haul of
clinical trials: Phase I to see what dose you can safely
give the patient, Phase II to see if it cures infections,
and Phase III to compare its efficacy to that of
“standard of care treatment.” That’s going to take
five years and £500 million and these are numbers we
must find ways to reduce (while not compromising
safety) if we’re to keep ahead of bacteria, which can
evolve far more swiftly and cheaply.