    The mental consequences of our online
info-crunching are not universally bad.
Certain cognitive skills are strengthened by our use
of computers and the Net. These tend to involve
more primitive mental functions, such as hand-eye
coordination, reflex response, and the processing of
visual cues. One much-cited study of video gaming
revealed that after just 10 days of playing action
games on computers, a group of young people had
significantly boosted the speed with which they could
shift their visual focus between various images and
tasks.
     It’s likely that Web browsing also strengthens
brain functions related to fast-paced problem
solving, particularly when it requires spotting
patterns in a welter of data. A British study of the
way women search for medical information online
indicated that an experienced Internet user can, at
least in some cases, assess the trustworthiness and
probable value of a Web page in a matter of seconds.
The more we practice surfing and scanning, the more
adept our brain becomes at those tasks.
    But it would be a serious mistake to look narrowly
at such benefits and conclude that the Web is making
us smarter. In a Science article published in early
2009, prominent developmental psychologist Patricia
Greenfield reviewed more than 40 studies of the
effects of various types of media on intelligence and
learning ability. She concluded that “every medium
develops some cognitive skills at the expense of
others.” Our growing use of the Net and other
screen-based technologies, she wrote, has led to the
“widespread and sophisticated development of
visual-spatial skills.” But those gains go hand in hand
with a weakening of our capacity for the kind of
“deep processing” that underpins “mindful
knowledge acquisition, inductive analysis, critical
thinking, imagination, and reflection.”
    We know that the human brain is highly
plastic; neurons and synapses change as
circumstances change. When we adapt to a new
cultural phenomenon, including the use of a new
medium, we end up with a different brain, says
Michael Merzenich, a pioneer of the field of
neuroplasticity. That means our online habits
continue to reverberate in the workings of our brain
cells even when we’re not at a computer. We’re
exercising the neural circuits devoted to skimming
and multitasking while ignoring those used for
reading and thinking deeply.