    A female guppy can be sexually mature at two
months of age and have her first babies just a month
later. This unstinting rate of reproduction makes
Line guppies ideally suited for studying the rate of
evolution, and David Reznick, a biologist at UC
Riverside, has been doing exactly that for the last few
decades.
    People usually think of guppies as colorful
aquarium fish, but they also have a life in the real
world, inhabiting streams and rivers in tropical
places like Trinidad, where Reznick has done his
fieldwork. Guppies can experience different kinds of
conditions depending on the luck of the draw.
A lucky guppy is born above a waterfall or a set of
rapids, which keep out the predatory fish called pike
cichlids found in calmer downstream waters. As you
might expect, the guppy mortality rate—that is, the
proportion of individuals that die—is much higher in
the sites with the rapacious cichlids than in those
without them.
    Reznick has shown that if you bring the fish into
the lab and let them breed there, the guppies from
the sites with many predators become sexually
mature when they are younger and smaller than do
the guppies from the predator-free sites. In addition,
the litters of baby guppies produced by mothers from
the high-risk streams are larger, but each individual
baby is smaller than those produced by their
counterparts. The disparity makes sense because if
you are at risk of being eaten, being able to have
babies sooner, and spreading your energy reserves
over a lot of them, makes it more likely that you will
manage to pass on some of your genes before you
meet your fate. Reznick and other scientists also
demonstrated that these traits are controlled by the
guppies’ genes, not by the environment in which they
grow up.
    How quickly, though, could these differences in
how the two kinds of guppies lived their lives have
evolved? Because there are numerous tributaries of
the streams in Trinidad, with guppies living in some
but not all of them, Reznick realized that he could, as
he put it in a 2008 paper, “treat streams like giant test
tubes by introducing guppies or predators” to places
they had not originally occurred, and then watch as
natural selection acted on the guppies. This kind of
real-world manipulation of nature is called
“experimental evolution,” and it is growing
increasingly popular among scientists working with
organisms that reproduce quickly enough for
humans to be able to see the outcome within our
lifetimes.
    Along with his students and colleagues, Reznick
removed groups of guppies from their predator
ridden lives below the waterfall and released them
into previously guppy-free streams above the falls.
Although small predatory killifish occurred in these
new sites, these fish do not pose anything close to the
danger of the cichlids. Then the scientists waited for
nature to do its work, and they brought the
descendants of the transplanted fish back to the lab
to examine their reproduction. After just eleven
years, the guppies released in the new streams had
evolved to mature later, and have fewer, bigger
offspring in each litter, just like the guppies that
naturally occurred in the cichlid-free streams.
Other studies of guppies in Trinidad have shown
evolutionary change in as few as two and a half years,
or a little over four generations, with more time
required for genetic shifts in traits such as the ability
to form schools and less time for changes in the
colorful spots and stripes on a male’s body.