    The motivation for deep-space travel is shifting
from discovery to economics. The past year has seen
a flurry of proposals aimed at bringing celestial riches
down to Earth. No doubt this will make a few
billionaires even wealthier, but we all stand to gain:
the mineral bounty and spin-off technologies could
enrich us all.
    But before the miners start firing up their rockets,
we should pause for thought. At first glance, space
mining seems to sidestep most environmental
concerns: there is (probably!) no life on asteroids,
and thus no habitats to trash. But its consequences
—both here on Earth and in space—merit careful
consideration.
    Part of this is about principles. Some will argue
that space’s “magnificent desolation” is not ours to
despoil, just as they argue that our own planet’s poles
should remain pristine. Others will suggest that
glutting ourselves on space’s riches is not an
acceptable alternative to developing more sustainable
ways of earthly life.
    History suggests that those will be hard lines to
hold, and it may be difficult to persuade the public
that such barren environments are worth preserving.
After all, they exist in vast abundance, and even
fewer people will experience them than have walked
through Antarctica’s icy landscapes.
    There’s also the emerging off-world economy to
consider. The resources that are valuable in orbit and
beyond may be very different to those we prize on
Earth. Questions of their stewardship have barely
been broached—and the relevant legal and regulatory
framework is fragmentary, to put it mildly.
    Space miners, like their earthly counterparts, are
often reluctant to engage with such questions.
One speaker at last week’s space-mining forum in
Sydney, Australia, concluded with a plea that
regulation should be avoided. But miners have much
to gain from a broad agreement on the for-profit
exploitation of space. Without consensus, claims will
be disputed, investments risky, and the gains made
insecure. It is in all of our long-term interests to seek
one out.