    Mr. Lincoln likens that bond of the Federal
Constitution, joining Free and Slave States together,
to a house divided against itself, and says that it is
contrary to the law of God, and cannot stand.
When did he learn, and by what authority does he
proclaim, that this Government is contrary to the law
of God and cannot stand? It has stood thus divided
into Free and Slave States from its organization up to
this day. During that period we have increased from
four millions to thirty millions of people; we have
extended our territory from the Mississippi to the
Pacific Ocean; we have acquired the Floridas and
Texas, and other territory sufficient to double our
geographical extent; we have increased in population,
in wealth, and in power beyond any example on
earth; we have risen from a weak and feeble power to
become the terror and admiration of the civilized
world; and all this has been done under a
Constitution which Mr. Lincoln, in substance, says is
in violation of the law of God; and under a Union
divided into Free and Slave States, which Mr. Lincoln
thinks, because of such division, cannot stand.
Surely, Mr. Lincoln is a wiser man than those who
framed the Government....
    I now come back to the question, why cannot this
Union exist forever, divided into Free and Slave
States, as our fathers made it? It can thus exist if each
State will carry out the principles upon which our
institutions were founded; to wit, the right of each
State to do as it pleases, without meddling with its
neighbors. Just act upon that great principle, and this
Union will not only live forever, but it will extend
and expand until it covers the whole continent, and
makes this confederacy one grand, ocean-bound
Republic. We must bear in mind that we are yet a
young nation, growing with a rapidity unequalled in
the history of the world, that our national increase is
great, and that the emigration from the old world is
increasing, requiring us to expand and acquire new
territory from time to time, in order to give our
people land to live upon. If we live upon the principle
of State rights and State sovereignty, each State
regulating its own affairs and minding its own
business, we can go on and extend indefinitely, just
as fast and as far as we need the territory....