    In complaining of what I said in my speech at
Springfield, in which he says I accepted my
nomination for the Senatorship . . . he again quotes
that portion in which I said that “a house divided
against itself cannot stand.” Let me say a word in
regard to that matter. He tries to persuade us that
there must be a variety in the different institutions of
the States of the Union; that that variety necessarily
proceeds from the variety of soil, climate, of the face
of the country, and the difference in the natural
features of the States. I agree to all that. Have these
very matters ever produced any difficulty among us?
Not at all. Have we ever had any quarrel over the fact
that they have laws in Louisiana designed to regulate
the commerce that springs from the production of
sugar? Or because we have a different class relative to
the production of flour in this State? Have they
produced any differences? Not at all. They are the
very cements of this Union. They don’t make the
house a “house divided against itself.” They are the
props that hold up the house and sustain the Union.
    But has it been so with this element of slavery?
Have we not always had quarrels and difficulties over
it? And when will we cease to have quarrels over it?
Like causes produce like effects. It is worth while to
observe that we have generally had comparative
peace upon the slavery question, and that there has
been no cause for alarm until it was excited by the
effort to spread it into new territory. Whenever it has
been limited to its present bounds, and there has
been no effort to spread it, there has been peace. All
the trouble and convulsion has proceeded from
efforts to spread it over more territory. It was thus at
the date of the Missouri Compromise. It was so again
with the annexation of Texas; so with the territory
acquired by the Mexican War; and it is so now.
Whenever there has been an effort to spread it there
has been agitation and resistance. . . . Do you think
that the nature of man will be changed, that the same
causes that produced agitation at one time will not
have the same effect at another?