    I have shown how democracy destroys or
modifies the different inequalities which originate in
society; but is this all? or does it not ultimately affect
that great inequality of man and woman which has
seemed, up to the present day, to be eternally based
in human nature? I believe that the social changes
which bring nearer to the same level the father and
son, the master and servant, and superiors and
inferiors generally speaking, will raise woman and
make her more and more the equal of man. But here,
more than ever, I feel the necessity of making myself
clearly understood; for there is no subject on which
the coarse and lawless fancies of our age have taken a
freer range.
    There are people in Europe who, confounding
together the different characteristics of the sexes,
would make of man and woman beings not only
equal but alike. They would give to both the same
functions, impose on both the same duties, and grant
to both the same rights; they would mix them in all
things—their occupations, their pleasures, their
business. It may readily be conceived, that by thus
attempting to make one sex equal to the other, both
are degraded; and from so preposterous a medley of
the works of nature nothing could ever result but
weak men and disorderly women.
    It is not thus that the Americans understand that
species of democratic equality which may be
established between the sexes. They admit, that as
nature has appointed such wide differences between
the physical and moral constitution of man and
woman, her manifest design was to give a distinct
employment to their various faculties; and they hold
that improvement does not consist in making beings
so dissimilar do pretty nearly the same things, but in
getting each of them to fulfill their respective tasks in
the best possible manner. The Americans have
applied to the sexes the great principle of political
economy which governs the manufactures of our age,
by carefully dividing the duties of man from those of
woman, in order that the great work of society may
be the better carried on.