    As society was constituted until the last few
generations, inequality was its very basis; association
grounded on equal rights scarcely existed; to be
equals was to be enemies; two persons could hardly
coöperate in anything, or meet in any amicable
relation, without the law’s appointing that one of
them should be the superior of the other.
Mankind have outgrown this state, and all things
now tend to substitute, as the general principle of
human relations, a just equality, instead of the
dominion of the strongest. But of all relations, that
between men and women, being the nearest and
most intimate, and connected with the greatest
number of strong emotions, was sure to be the last to
throw off the old rule, and receive the new; for,
in proportion to the strength of a feeling is the
tenacity with which it clings to the forms and
circumstances with which it has even accidentally
become associated....
    . . . The proper sphere for all human beings is the
largest and highest which they are able to attain to.
What this is, cannot be ascertained without complete
liberty of choice. . . . Let every occupation be open to
all, without favor or discouragement to any, and
employments will fall into the hands of those men or
women who are found by experience to be most
capable of worthily exercising them. There need be
no fear that women will take out of the hands of men
any occupation which men perform better than they.
Each individual will prove his or her capacities, in the
only way in which capacities can be proved,—by
trial; and the world will have the benefit of the best
faculties of all its inhabitants. But to interfere
beforehand by an arbitrary limit, and declare that
whatever be the genius, talent, energy, or force of
mind, of an individual of a certain sex or class, those
faculties shall not be exerted, or shall be exerted only
in some few of the many modes in which others are
permitted to use theirs, is not only an injustice to the
individual, and a detriment to society, which loses
what it can ill spare, but is also the most effectual way
of providing that, in the sex or class so fettered, the
qualities which are not permitted to be exercised
shall not exist.