    We are told that it is not within the “province of
woman,” to discuss the subject of slavery; that it is a
“political question,” and we are “stepping out of our
Line sphere,” when we take part in its discussion. It is not
true that it is merely a political question, it is likewise
a question of justice, of humanity, of morality, of
religion; a question which, while it involves
considerations of immense importance to the welfare
and prosperity of our country, enters deeply into the
home-concerns, the every-day feelings of millions of
our fellow beings. Whether the laborer shall receive
the reward of his labor, or be driven daily to
unrequited toil—whether he shall walk erect in the
dignity of conscious manhood, or be reckoned
among the beasts which perish—whether his bones
and sinews shall be his own, or another’s—whether
his child shall receive the protection of its natural
guardian, or be ranked among the live-stock of the
estate, to be disposed of as the caprice or interest of
the master may dictate—. . . these considerations are
all involved in the question of liberty or slavery.
    And is a subject comprehending interests of such
magnitude, merely a “political question,” and one in
which woman “can take no part without losing
something of the modesty and gentleness which are
her most appropriate ornaments”? May not the
“ornament of a meek and quiet spirit” exist with an
upright mind and enlightened intellect, and must
woman necessarily be less gentle because her heart is
open to the claims of humanity, or less modest
because she feels for the degradation of her enslaved
sisters, and would stretch forth her hand for their
rescue?
    By the Constitution of the United States, the
whole physical power of the North is pledged for the
suppression of domestic insurrections, and should
the slaves, maddened by oppression, endeavor to
shake off the yoke of the taskmaster, the men of the
North are bound to make common cause with the
tyrant, and put down, at the point of the bayonet,
every effort on the part of the slave, for the
attainment of his freedom. And when the father,
husband, son, and brother shall have left their homes
to mingle in the unholy warfare, “to become the
executioners of their brethren, or to fall themselves
by their hands,” will the mother, wife, daughter, and
sister feel that they have no interest in this subject?
Will it be easy to convince them that it is no concern
of theirs, that their homes are rendered desolate, and
their habitations the abodes of wretchedness?
Surely this consideration is of itself sufficient to
arouse the slumbering energies of woman, for the
overthrow of a system which thus threatens to lay in
ruins the fabric of her domestic happiness; and she
will not be deterred from the performance of her
duty to herself, her family, and her country, by the
cry of political question.
    But admitting it to be a political question, have we
no interest in the welfare of our country? May we not
permit a thought to stray beyond the narrow limits of
our own family circle, and of the present hour? May
we not breathe a sigh over the miseries of our
countrymen, nor utter a word of remonstrance
against the unjust laws that are crushing them to the
earth? Must we witness “the headlong rage or
heedless folly,” with which our nation is rushing
onward to destruction, and not seek to arrest its
downward course? Shall we silently behold the land
which we love with all the heart-warm affection of
children, rendered a hissing and a reproach
throughout the world, by this system which is already
tolling the death-bell of her decease among the
nations? No: the events of the last two years have cast
their dark shadows before, overclouding the bright
prospects of the future, and shrouding the destinies
of our country in more than midnight gloom, and we
cannot remain inactive. Our country is as dear to us
as to the proudest statesman, and the more closely
our hearts cling to “our altars and our homes,” the
more fervent are our aspirations that every
inhabitant of our land may be protected in his
fireside enjoyments by just and equal laws; that the
foot of the tyrant may no longer invade the domestic
sanctuary, nor his hand tear asunder those whom
God himself has united by the most holy ties. Let our
course, then, still be onward!