    In the early 1990s, textbooks acknowledged that
humans had slow-conducting nerves, but asserted
that those nerves only responded to two types of
Line stimuli: pain and temperature. Sensations of pressure
and vibration were believed to travel only along
myelinated, fast-signaling nerve fibers, which also
give information about location. Experiments
blocking nerve fibers supported this notion.
Preventing fast fibers from firing (either by clamping
the relevant nerve or by injecting the local anesthetic
lidocaine) seemed to eliminate the sensation of
pressure altogether, but blocking slow fibers only
seemed to reduce sensitivity to warmth or a small
painful shock.
    Håkan Olausson and his Gothenburg University
colleagues Åke Vallbo and Johan Wessberg
wondered if slow fibers responsive to gentle pressure
might be active in humans as well as in other
mammals. In 1993, they corralled 28 young
volunteers and recorded nerve signals while gently
brushing the subjects’ arms with their fingertips.
Using a technique called microneurography, in
which a fine filament is inserted into a single nerve to
capture its electrical impulses, the scientists were able
to measure how quickly—or slowly—the nerves
fired. They showed that soft stroking prompted
two different signals, one immediate and one
delayed. The delay, Olausson explains, means that
the signal from a gentle touch on the forearm will
reach the brain about a half second later. This delay
identified nerve impulses traveling at speeds
characteristic of slow, unmyelinated fibers—about
1 meter/second—confirming the presence of these
fibers in human hairy skin. (In contrast, fast-
conducting fibers, already known to respond to
touch, signal at a rate between 35 and 75 m/s.)
    Then, in 1999, the group looked more closely at
the characteristics of the slow fibers. They named
these “low-threshold” nerves “C-tactile,” or CT,
fibers, said Olausson, because of their “exquisite
sensitivity” to slow, gentle tactile stimulation, but
unresponsiveness to noxious stimuli like pinpricks.
    But why exactly humans might have such fibers,
which respond only to a narrow range of rather
subtle stimuli, was initially mystifying. Unlike other
types of sensory nerves, CT fibers could be found
only in hairy human skin—such as the forearm and
thigh. No amount of gentle stroking of hairless skin,
such as the palms and soles of the feet, prompted
similar activity signatures. Olausson and his
colleagues decided that these fibers must be
conveying a different dimension of sensory
information than fast-conducting fibers.
    Although microneurography can give
information about how a single nerve responds to
gentle brushing and pressure, it cannot tease out
what aspect of sensation that fiber relays, says
Olausson. He wanted to know if that same slow
nerve can distinguish where the brush touches the
arm, and whether it can discern the difference
between a goat-hair brush and a feather. Most
importantly, could that same fiber convey a pleasant
sensation?
    To address the question, Olausson’s group sought
out a patient known as G.L. who had an unusual
nerve defect. More than 2 decades earlier, she had
developed numbness across many parts of her body
after taking penicillin to treat a cough and fever.
Testing showed that she had lost responsiveness to
pressure, and a nerve biopsy confirmed that G.L.’s
quick-conducting fibers were gone, resulting in an
inability to sense any pokes, prods, or pinpricks
below her nose. But she could still sense warmth,
suggesting that her slow-conducting unmyelinated
fibers were intact.
    Upon recruiting G.L., Olausson tested her by
brushing her arm gently at the speed of between
2–10 centimeters per second. She had more trouble
distinguishing the direction or pressure of the brush
strokes than most subjects, but reported feeling a
pleasant sensation. When the researchers tried
brushing her palm, where CT fibers are not found,
she felt nothing.
    Olausson used functional MRI studies to examine
which areas of the brain lit up when G.L.’s arm was
gently brushed to activate CT fibers. In normal
subjects, both the somatosensory and insular cortices
were activated, but only the insular cortex [which
processes emotion] was active when researchers
brushed G.L.’s arm. This solidified the notion that
CT fibers convey a more emotional quality of touch,
rather than the conscious aspect that helps us
describe what we are sensing. CT fibers, it seemed,
specifically provide pleasurable sensations.