    Many millennia before the invention of
herbicides, farmers simply plowed their fields to
control weeds. Even today, plowing can constitute a
Line valuable part of an integrated weed-management
program. Although plowing kills standing weeds,
farmers have long known that it often leads to the
emergence of new weed seedlings in a few weeks.
    Ecologists have shown that a farmer’s field can
have 50,000 or more weed seeds per square meter
buried beneath the soil surface. Plant physiologists
have shown that seeds buried more than about one
centimeter below the soil surface do not receive
enough light to germinate. Do the blades of a plow,
which can reach more than a foot beneath the soil
surface, bring some of these buried seeds to the
surface where their germination is induced by
exposure to sunlight?
    Two ecologists, Jonathan Sauer and Gwendolyn
Struik, began to study this question in the 1960s. In a
relatively simple experiment, they went to ten
different habitats in Wisconsin during the night and
collected pairs of soil samples. They stirred up the
soil in one sample of each pair in the light and stirred
up the other sample of each pair in the dark. They then
exposed all ten pairs to natural sunlight in a
greenhouse. For nine of the ten pairs of soil samples,
weed growth was greater in the samples stirred up in
light. They concluded that soil disturbance gives
weed seeds a “light break,” and this stimulates their
germination.
    More recently, Karl Hartmann of Erlangen
University in Germany reasoned that when farmers
plowed their fields during the day, the buried weed
seeds are briefly exposed to sunlight as the soil is
turned over, and that this stimulates their
germination. Although the light exposures from
plowing may be less than one millisecond, that can
be enough to induce seed germination. Thus the
germination of weed seeds would be minimized if
farmers simply plowed their fields during the night,
when the photon fluence rate [the rate at which
photons hit the surface] is below 10^15 photons per
square meter per second. Although even under these
conditions hundreds of millions of photons strike
each square millimeter of ground each second, this
illumination is below the threshold needed to
stimulate the germination of most seeds.
    Hartmann says that he was very skeptical when
he first came up with this idea because he assumed
that such a simple method of weed control as
plowing at nighttime must be ineffective or it would
have been discovered long ago. But the subsequent
experiments, first presented at a 1989 scientific
meeting in Freiburg, Germany, clearly demonstrated
that the method can be effective.
    Hartmann tested his idea by plowing two
agricultural strips near Altershausen, Germany.
The farmer Karl Seydel cultivated one strip, repeated
threefold, at around midday and the other strip
at night. No crops were planted in these pilot
experiments, to avoid possible competition with
the emerging weeds. The results were dramatic.
More than 80 percent of the surface of the field
plowed in daylight was covered by weeds, whereas
only about 2 percent of the field plowed at night was
covered by weeds.
    This method of weed control is currently being
used by several farmers in Germany. Because many
of the same weed species that invade farmers’ fields
in Germany also invade fields elsewhere in the world,
this method should be successful elsewhere. In fact,
recent studies at universities in Nebraska, Oregon,
Minnesota, Denmark, Sweden, and Argentina
support this idea.